will fighting in gaza turn into a wider
war israel launches airstrikes on gaza
and palestinians hit back with more than
100 rockets what prompted the latest
escalation what impact will it have on
daily lives this is inside story
[Music]
hello and welcome to the show i'm sami
zaydan fears are growing of another war
over gaza after israel launched their
strikes on the palestinian territory the
military is warning of a week of
operations against armed groups tension
had been building since tuesday israeli
forces arrested bassam assadi a
palestinian-islamic jihad commander in
the west bank that day the armed group
threatened to retaliate israel then
closed roads near the border with gaza a
day later and on friday israeli missiles
struck what the army said were islamic
jihad sights in the strip one of the
groups senior commanders was killed
several civilians died as well including
a five-year-old girl
what is this child's fault she was
dreaming of going to kindergarten and
asked her father for a school bag and
clothes what has she done wrong this
innocent child
well israeli airstrikes have continued
for a second day you must say it has
more from gaza city
this is the second day of israeli raids
across the gaza strip in a serious
development of these raids israel now is
targeting residential buildings in
residential homes and even civilians
this used to be a two-story residential
building of four apartments it has been
totally destroyed and brought to the
ground the families here were given 15
minutes to evacuate before it was
completely destroyed not only this
building has been completely destroyed
but all the other residential uh
buildings and apartments adjacent to
this building have been partially and
severely uh
damaged and this is a serious
development another home in talilhau
area also a couple of meters away from
this area has been targeted medical
crews tell us that a lot of injuries
mostly from children were abroad out of
that targeting we do not have uh the
final number from the ministry of health
but until now 12 people have been killed
and over a hundred have been injured in
the latest israeli escalation on the
gaza strip you may see it for inside
story gaza
jihad fired more than a hundred rockets
towards southern israel many of them
intercepted by the iron dome defense
system john holman has more from the
israel gaza border
we're here on the border between israel
and gaza back there in the last few
hours there's been rockets heading
across from gaza
into israel a lot of those have proved
ineffectual either because israel's iron
dome anti-rocket system has shot them
down all because
they've landed in depopulated areas or
full and short in gaza
this has come this retaliation after
israel on friday launched strikes
into gaza that killed a leader of
islamic jihad
that came after earlier in the week
israel also detained a leader of islamic
jihad in the occupied west bank so at
the moment it's two
actions from israel especially the
strike on friday that's caused this
retaliation from islamic jihad now the
question that everyone's asking is
whether this will escalate further
that seems to be a question of hamas the
other group in gaza that control much of
gaza get involved in this or whether
they don't
there's also questions about why israel
has chosen to do this they say that it's
been in essence a preemptive strike
because there's been a threat to them
from gaza a lot of other people
speculating this is about internal
politics and elections uh yahil lapid
the acting prime minister wanting to
show that he's strong we'll see how this
develops in the coming hours and the
coming days john holman inside story
now let's take a closer look at the
palestinian islamic jihad or pijs it's
known the group was founded in the 1980s
and is the second largest armed group in
gaza after hamas the two often act
independently of one another the pij
keeps a presence in gaza and the
occupied west bank with a focus on
military confrontations iran is a major
financial supporter the group has been
designated a terrorist organization by
israel the united states the european
union the uk japan canada and australia
when islamic jihad and hamas have a
common stance against israel but the
relationship can become tense when hamas
exerts pressure on the pij to stop
attacks or retaliations
[Music]
let's bring in our guests into the show
we have joining us from gaza ranji
surani a lawyer and the director of the
palestinian center for human rights from
ramallah no rauda a political analyst
and columnist
and from west jerusalem yoni ben
menachem a political analyst and
journalist a warm welcome to everyone if
i could start with noor
do you think we're going to see another
full-blown war in gaza
well i think that's still um
it's still not clear so far it doesn't
seem like this is going to
uh escalate into something like the
aggression that we saw last year but i
think it's important to remind the
viewers that gaza has been under assault
and siege for over 15 years in fact a
lot more than that but let's just
examine the past 15 years this is one of
the most densely populated areas in the
world the majority of the population of
2 million are children
and they
most of their lives has been spent under
a siege by israel
and so that
that means that they've lived their life
in a state of uh perpetual trauma uh
perpetual violence as well and and these
episodes of uh outright assault and
military uh raids are just the you know
the heightened uh um
accents right right
more into the the reality of the daily
grind of life for people in gaza but let
me refocus us back back on the question
of what gaza is heading into and let me
ask yoni do you think the israeli
leadership wants a full-blown war right
now with gaza
of course not who wants a war nobody
wants a war
i think
what happened is that
the
islamic jihad organization they tried to
change the rule of the games and they
create a new equation
and they escalated
over the arrest of uh
bassam sadi one of their leaders in the
west bank in janine who was arrested
and
and since they tried to change how did
they escalate things yoni when even
after that arrest on tuesday we didn't
see the much-feared
wide wave of palestinian rocket attacks
into
israel after that arrest on tuesday
up until the attacks the israeli raids
on friday right
right but
of course i don't represent the israeli
government or the israeli army but the
the army the israeli army says and
security israel's security forces says
and i don't have any reason to doubt
them because
the check that i made with my sources
confirmed that
the islamic jihad was planning a
an attack
on the israeli settlements on the border
with gaza using
a anti-tech connect missiles and snipers
and
what israel did what israeli army did
they thwarted this plant attack
actually what they did is a preemptive
strike on a few activists of the islamic
jihad
and this
caused the escalation and the the
rockets over 200 rockets were launched
by the islamic jihad towards israel
let me bring noor back in as the only
said no one wants a full-blown war why
are we seeing an escalation then noah
well i think uh this israeli government
manufactured this escalation it pushed
for it over the past two weeks it did it
took uh every measure imaginable to
increase tensions whether it's by raids
and detentions and assassinations in the
west bank by sealing off the gaza strip
which cannot survive
without access to goods from outside the
strip
immediately after detaining bassam
assadi and then by assassinating a
prominent leader of the pij in gaza on
friday uh this was this is on on the
israeli government this is on the
israeli prime minister who's going to
run for elections and
and unfortunately we've seen this trend
before we've seen israeli leaders
feeling that they need to prove
themselves worthy of the israeli vote
especially those votes on the right by
proving that they can be tough on the
palestinians that they can commit war
crimes against the palestinians um
without hesitation and that's uh really
what we're saying what we're seeing
we're sp seeing it really jump into the
israelites
he said look i checked with my sources
this was an intervention by israel to
stop a planned attack by palestinian
islamic jihad i think he's referring to
the israeli airstrikes which began on
friday
right well i mean you know
your guests might consider the israeli
army a credible source but i think
uh those of us who've covered this for a
long time and and and still remember uh
the
spin that was it was told even about the
killing of uh our dear colleague shirin
abu aklay uh no to doubt the credibility
of this occupying army there is no such
thing as a preemptive
strike you cannot kill someone extra to
judicially assassinate someone
because you think they're going to carry
out
something the fact is not a single shot
was fired from gaza israel escalated
israel targeted islamic jihad in the
west bank and gaza israel created
this escalation created this mess
and
will have to take responsibility for it
what is happening is is on their hands
all right
maybe it's important to take a little
step back raji
whatever the uh
you know how this got escalated at this
point we're getting reports of civilians
paying a price
um including children being killed
in some of these airstrikes by the
israelis what would a wider war mean for
basic human rights for civilians both
palestinians and israelis living in the
south palestinian israeli conflict one
of the most well documented
conflicts in the modern history and i'm
not saying
you know documented it's legally
documented
and there was
the entire file of the offensive of 2014
represented to the
icc
and there was an investigation open
and adding to that the great marshal for
plus
the blockade on gaza
and
adding to that
may
2021 last year offensive
and
every time israel targeting us to
offensive in god's attack gaza it's
deliberate intentional
and
it's very clear in the eye of the storm
civilians and civilian targets more than
70 percent of the casualties and
killings and destruction
of may last year
where civilians and civilian targets
including 62 children
has been killed in
11 days
so uh
israel i mean
what they are doing
they are not really i mean
targeting
the jihad islamic per se
or hamas who are the good guys in in
this time
but they are targeting palestinian
civilians they are the ones in the isle
of the storm and they are very
doing this to them killings
enduring
destruction
social economical suffocation
i don't know
why they've located gaza for the last 16
years why 2.2
million people in 365
square kilometers
has been persecuted with the crime of
blockade
according to our own statute it's war
crime it's persecution
and israel should be hold accountability
for it and for many many rights
sorry let me bring in yoni again um
you know noor touched on the point of
upcoming elections in israel and
many analysts including even some
israeli commentators
uh have written today about their
suspicion that the israeli airstrikes
might have something to do with those
upcoming elections what do you make of
that yoni
look
if eventually after this round of
fighting
will be over and the politicians
will use what happened in gaza
in their political campaign
this is possible but to come and say
that
this is the reason
for what happened for the
preemptive strike to thwart the terror
threat from gaza i think this is
exaggerated i think that
and i didn't get the information as the
the guest from ramallah said from the
israeli army i'm
covering this
what is happening in territories for the
last 40 years and believe me i have
credible sources and i checked this
information there thoroughly
and and the the reason for this attack
was to a thwart a terror attack
and
it's got nothing to do with politics but
i it's possible that the politician will
use it in their political campaign this
is a possibility yoni what prompted the
um israeli raid on janine on tuesday you
you referred to the reason for the
israeli airstrikes on friday being a
pre-emptive
strike to stop attacks on israel what
prompted the the beginning of this round
with the the move which israel made by
raiding janine on tuesday dragging out
bassam sadi from the camp
video
showed him being dragged dogs biting him
that sort of
operation i mean at that time again
though we didn't see the volleys of
palestinian rockets going across from
gaza into into what is happening
what is happening in jeanine is a daily
thing
the palestinian authority lost control
in the
city of geneva the refugee camp of
janine and the few villages surrounding
it they they cannot
control these areas anymore security
wise and this
as a result the
activities of the armed the military
group palestinian groups in janine
developed
and
they started to uh
to to become a threat to israel's
security and
as some of the of them even infiltrated
israel and carried out terror attacks
like the one in tel aviv
so
what the israeli army was doing there
was a
operation of arrests and the
basamis basami sadi
what you said right from the house and
so on he was he tried to escape from the
israeli army
and he was captured and taken to
detention and interrogation this is what
you saw
these are the pictures that you saw
right no
i guess for many including the un
investigators that handed in a report on
june the 7th
it comes down to when you start to break
it down like we're doing on this show it
comes down to the occupation they say
that these tensions they're referring to
the last major war between israel and
gaza were caused by what it calls a
perpetual occupation of palestinian
areas with no apparent intention of
ending it is this
violence simply the cost of what the un
investigators call a perpetual
occupation
absolutely and it's also the result of
the arrogance
of israel the occupying power that
expects
the people it occupies to be subdued to
die quietly to surrender to detention
quietly and to not resist or demand
freedom that is not not a tenable
formula it is not a situation that any
occupier
has been able to create much less israel
but because israel has gotten so used to
being treated exceptionally
to
countries covering up for its crimes
protecting it from accountability
whether at the international criminal
court or otherwise
it has
become
so audacious in expressing its
indignation at any sign of palestinian
resistance or demand for freedom it
expects uh that all palestinians will
acquiesce to its hegemonic power and so
it doesn't see that its raids on janine
are provocative it doesn't see the
killing of palestinians as a
incendiary as illegal as crimes
and it it doesn't expect or doesn't
accept that such crimes such murders
would have a reaction so long as th this
occupation and the culture of impunity
with which it operates continues then of
course we're going you know this uh um
this reality of brutalization of
traumatization of violence will will
persist um and really ordinary
palestinians are the ones who continue
to pay a very dear price especially in
gaza
let me take that point back then to yoni
i i mentioned what the un investigators
had found on june the 7th human rights
organizations have said similar things
you can look up amnesty international
may
2021 where they say quote unless the
world presses israel to address the root
causes like the illegal blockade of of
gaza impunity dispossession oppression
of palestinians there'll be another
round of civilian deaths and destruction
does it not come back yoni to
this being the price of occupation and
and blockade
look uh it's very it's clear that the
solution to this problem is a political
solution and not the military solution
is it not the end of occupation though
yoni
look a
there are different school of thoughts
about the word you use the occupation
especially as referred to gaza strip
israel withdrew completely from the gaza
strip
as you know it's true there is a
blockade on gaza but this is a result of
what happened in gaza itself
when a
a terrorist organization called hamas
made the coup d'etat and took over
by force
took over the gaza strip expelled the
the palestinian authority from gaza
and they built a
big
terror infrastructure in gaza
which is a
full of tunnels
rockets and
his old aim is to
try and attack israel and destroy the
the state of israel they say publicly
even the islamic jihad just look at the
name of
this organization jihad what does it
mean in arabic of course you know what
it means it means holy war
holy war against who actually actually
it means a struggle but perhaps we'll
get lost in semantics too deep into us
no no no no
it doesn't of course mean the
destruction of the state of israel or
holy war
victor
anyway unbelievable all right let me
because we've only got a few minutes we
haven't really heard enough i don't
think from rajiv raj you were already
getting reports that for example israel
has stopped the shipment of fuel into
gaza because of this latest escalation
and that the power station of gaza is
not now functioning
tell us what that means for daily life
people going to school people in their
homes for hospitals
our
electricity plan
has been shut down this morning
there is no electricity in entire gaza
and i'm sitting with you just for one
reason that i have my private generator
otherwise it's mission impossible even
to contact the outside world second
it's not only i mean you know for
civilians and civilian news
but the entire hospital system collapsed
and their health system collapsed i mean
there is hundreds of
medical operations should be carried
every day
now it's almost zero level because
operation theaters doesn't work
at the time being
and
even
transferring
what we call it life-saving cases to
israel is not allowed so many will die
ultimately i mean because of lack of
transfer to receive developed medical
care and life-saving
radiotherapy etc not allowed i mean to
be taking gaza
and the level of suffering i mean on
this sector
immensely huge
all right well i think we're going to
have to leave the discussion there let's
thank our guests very much for their
contributions raji surani
thank you two for watching you can see
the show again anytime by visiting our
website aljazeera.com
further discussion head over to our
facebook page that's facebook.com aj
inside story you can also join the
conversation on twitter our handlebar is
at aj inside story from me sami zayd and
the whole team here for now is goodbye
[Music]
you